---
title: Swatting and Cybersecurity..are they connected? 
published: true
---
 
**Swatting and Cybersecurity: Are they connected?**

The most common assumption about Cybersecurity is that it is in reference to hackers, computer viruses and protection of any “Cyber” related incident involving PII (Personal Identifiable Information)
with the purpose of negatively impacting the victim. When the general public hears the term “SWAT” they are probably thinking of a special tactical law enforcement team that uses heavy duty militarized weapons, heavy bullet proof armor, and ballistic shields to apprehend violent criminals or to respond to violent incidents. What happens when Cybersecurity becomes a tangible threat to an innocent person and SWAT teams are called to respond, sometimes resulting in fatalities due to false reports? The answer is Swatting.
	According to research and analysis conducted by Sangfor Technologies (https://www.sangfor.com/glossary/cybersecurity/what-is-swatting )  
“Swatting happens when someone makes a fraudulent phone call to emergency services reporting a serious crime.” As a result of these calls, heavily armed law enforcement, typical SWAT, arrive at the victim’s residence or place of employment. What originally started as a prank between teenagers or gamers has now escalated. It is being used to victimize innocent people using SWAT response teams which have ultimately ended in some serious situations including death. We are not here to discuss innocent prank phone calls like a teenager ordering a pizza to a friends house to get back at them for losing a video game. We are here to address how everyday people can easily access PII via the internet, specifically video game systems, and locate someone via an IP (Internet Protocol)  address to cause a SWAT response which can result in criminal charges, violent situations, injury and death. 
	When an individual utilizes online gaming systems, at some point they need to register using their PII, such as name, address, phone number and/or email address. For a lot of gaming sites and consoles, storing financial information is common to purchase games readily. However, any time an individual uses a gaming console that connects to the internet, an IP address is tied to that location and account. With the abundance of information on the internet and dark web, it is relatively easy for your average person to learn how to find someones IP address and trace that to a specific location, which can be referred to as “Doxing.”
According to https://www.sangfor.com, “Unfortunately, swatting can be simple to carry out. The attacker will first learn your home address through various techniques. This includes following paper trails but more commonly, using social engineering techniques.”  Phishing, a social engineering technique that cyber attackers use to bait victims, is one of the many ways that swatting occurs. It is a way for sensitive information to be shared by using fraudulent forms of communication or websites. It is important for everyone to be educated in phishing so that they understand the difference between a legitimate source and a fraudulent one in order to avoid oversharing personal information causing them to fall victim. Social media usage, such as Facebook, Instagram, Tik-Tok and Snapchat is easily tracked if one does not update their privacy settings. Anytime a person utilizies a technological device that ties to the internet, frequently even when the locator setting is turned off, a geographical location gets marked to that IP address and that individuals device. With a couple youtube tutorials, which can be easily googled, and a malice intent, can land a person’s home address in the hands of a criminal in a matter of minutes. It is important to update one’s privacy settings and turn on two-factor authentication, such as facial recognition, fingerprint scanners, or verification codes sent via email or texts, to further protect and potentially prevent becoming a cyber attack victim. Using the same password for every social media platform or any other online account does not make one’s information secure. Switching up passwords to avoid potential brute-force attacks, malware deployment, or credential stuffing can make it even more difficult for attackers to access to one’s sensitive information. Switching passwords every 30 days along with nor allowing any app or site to store passwords or PI information is good practice to protect potential victims. 
	Per https://www.fortinet.com, “Putting a figure on swatting cases is difficult because swatting is not classified as a specific category in the crime statistics database of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). However, a former FBI special agent has revealed that swatting cases more than doubled from 400 in 2011 to over 1,000 in 2019.” There a few significant cases regarding the topic that have become high-profile examples. According to https://www.avast.com, “Swatting is most prevalent in the online gaming and streaming communities, putting online gamers and other personalities at potentially higher risk.” 
One specific high-profile case from December 28, 2017 was the altercation of Casey Viner, Shane Gaskill and Tyler Barris resulting in the wrongful death of Andrew Finch from Wichita, Kansas. 
According to https://www.cnn.com, Viner spoke about getting into an argument with Gaskill while playing Call of Duty:WWII because of a dispute over them being teammates. As part of the argument, Casey Viner threatened Shane Gaskill, stating that he would send SWAT forces over to his residence. Shane Gaskill responded to Casey Viner with a false address and Casey Viner then requested Tyler Barriss to perform the swatting act. Barriss called local law enforcement to report that Finch had shot and killed his own father while still holding a hostage. Heavily armed law enforcement responded to the home of Finch and when Finch saw law enforcement he became startled and confused which resulted in law enforcement shooting and killing him. It was later found out that Shane Gaskill provided his previous residence address which was then the current address of Andrew Finch. 
	Another high-profile swatting incident is a Ukranian hacker named Sergey Vovnenko who sent Heroin to a cybersecurity blogger Brian Krebs. “Hacker Who Sent me Heroin Faces Charges in U.S.” from 2015 on his website, “https://krebsonsecurity.com. According to Krebs, Sergey Vovnenko (a.k.a “Fly,” “Flycracker,” and “MUXACC1”) was an administrator of a cybercrime forum which specialized in financial fraud obtained Krebs personal information, to include his credit report and residential address. Vovenenko purchased heroin from the dark web site named Silk Road and sent it over to Krebs’ home address through the  United States Postal Service. Vovenenko intended to mail the Heroin to Krebs, call the local authorities to report the drugs and that there was recent criminal activity at Krebs residence. Krebs was able to gain access to Vovnenko’s forum which included the USPS tracking information and email. Once Krebs was able to correlate that the email address belonged to Vovenenko, he was able to provided the information to the federal authorities in Italy along with the online account Vovenenko was using to transfer payments in Naples,Italy. Authorities in Italy were able to arrest Vovenenko and was awaiting extradition to the United States to face charges for the cyber crimes he commited.
	Cybersecurity is a fast and ever growing field which presents with new challenges daily to protect individuals using the internet or any technological device. Swatting can seem like a problem only to those who are affected but in a high-paced technologically reliant world, it is becoming a growing concern and issue for all who use the internet. The internet and the world wide web shows no signs of slowing down or even being regulated in the United States where freedom of speech prevails. However, with any new advancement there are always opportunities for criminals or pranksters, to cause great harm to others by a simple disregard for their actions. For those who use the internet and provide any kind of PI to the world through a technological source, the following tips can be used to help prevent against swatting and to protect PI data. Individuals can use a firewall to ensure web application security and prevent spoofing, update their privacy settings, use a variety of passwords for different online platforms, do not store passwords online or in any app, enable two-factor authentication and avoid oversharing of personal information. 
	
Works Cited
Hanna, Jason, and Jamiel Lynch. “An Ohio Gamer Gets Prison Time Over a ‘Swatting’ Call That Led 	to a Man’s Death.” CNN. CNN. 14 Sept. 2019. Web. 18 Jan. 2025. 	<www.cnn.com/2019/09/14/us/swatting-sentence-casey-viner/index.html.>
Gorman, Ben. “What Is a Swatting Incident and How Does Swatting Work?” What Is a Swatting 	Incident and How Does Swatting Work?, 12 Mar. 2024, www.avast.com/c-what-is-swatting.
Hacker Who Sent Me Heroin Faces Charges in U.S. 15 Oct. 2015, krebsonsecurity.com/2015/10/hacker-who-sent-me-heroin-faces-charges-in-u-s.
Ohio Gamer Sentenced in Deadly Swatting Case. 13 Sept. 2019, www.justice.gov/usao-ks/pr/ohio-gamer-sentenced-deadly-swatting-case.
Technologies, Sangfor. “What Is Swatting in Cybersecurity?” Sangfor Technologies, 3 Mar. 2023, www.sangfor.com/glossary/cybersecurity/what-is-swatting.
“What Is Swatting? How to Prevent Swatting | Fortinet.” Fortinet, www.fortinet.com/resources/cyberglossary/swatting.


